---
layout: post
title: "Spring Time - Table Topics"
image: /assets/img/blog/spring.jpg
description: "Table topics questions used at a themed meeting around spring."
tags: [toastmasters, tabletopic]
excerpt: Table topics questions used at a themed meeting around spring.
imgSrc: "Image by kareni from [Pixabay](https://pixabay.com/en/turkey-nature-landscape-ka%C3%A7kars-3048299/)"
---

#### Introduction

Welcome to the day light saving day! This change marks the special point when we are in the middle of spring and the plants are growing up for an amazing summer. We will having table topics today around this fabulous season-

#### Questions

* What are the three things you love about spring?
* What outdoor activities do you enjoy in the spring?
* What do you recall about springtime when you were growing up?
* What calls you to the cold mountains in spring?  
* What benefits do you derive from going on vacation during Spring season?
* What is your favorite season and why?
* What are your favorite springtime activities? What makes them special to you?
* Are there some things you tell yourself every year that you will do in spring but never get around to doing? Why?
* What role do seasons play in your life and planning?
* Spring cleaning is a reality in some people's lives. What is the relevance of spring cleaning in your life?
* Is spring just a summer "wannabe" or does it have a value all its own?
* Springtime is often seen as a time of new beginnings and hope. What would be some signs of springtime in our toastmasters?
* We moved the clocks forward today and lost an hour of sleep. How does that affect you?
* What are your thoughts on the pros and cons of Daylight Savings Time?
* Share your favorite spring memory.
